#LyX 1.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 221
\textclass article
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

Technical description of a multi-camera system for tracking freely-flying
 animals in realtime
\layout Author

Andrew D.
 Straw and Michael H.
 Dickinson
\layout Date

April 13, 2006
\layout Section

Introduction
\layout Standard

While two cameras are sufficient to reconstruct 3D information and have
 previously been used in the Dickinson lab to the position track fruit flies
 in realtime as they fly freely through large (e.g.
 1m diameter) arenas, several issues prompted the development of a new realtime
 camera tracking system.
 Foremost among these were two desires: 1) an increase in spatial resolving
 power sufficient to determine body axis direction and 2) an increase in
 the spatial extent of the tracking volume.
 We recently developed a multiple camera system to meet these needs that
 extracts fly position and orientation in soft realtime.
 Currently, this system functions with 5 cameras at 100 frames per second
 with about 30 msec latency.
 This document outlines the structure and function of this multiple-headed
 fly tracking beast we call 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

flydra
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

The imaging front end of the system consists of five monochrome digital
 cameras.
 Each camera is connected to a dedicated image processing computer, which
 performs a glorified background-subtraction algorithm to extract local
 2D points and, for each point where the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

eccentricity
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 (oriented luminance) exceeds some criterion, an orientation is also extracted.
 These data are sent over gigabit ethernet to a central 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

mainbrain
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 computer where data from all cameras are combined into 3D position and
 orientation.
 The algorithm used
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{hartley_zisserman}

\end_inset 

 constructs an observation matrix from each 2D image point and the camera
 calibration matrices, and the linear least squares fit for 3D position
 calculated using a singular value decomposition of this observation matrix.
 A similar operation is performed to extract 3D orientation.
 Currently, the cameras are calibrated using a simultaneous multi-camera
 calibration method
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{Svoboda}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Section

Implementation details
\layout Subsection

Operating system and computer topology
\layout Standard

The computers run Debian sarge GNU/Linux in a private gigabit LAN.
 The 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

mainbrain
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 and camera computers boot over the network and use a network mounted disk
 system for all operating system and application files, leaving the local
 disk for saving data.
 The fileserver computer acts to coordinate the network and serves as a
 NAT gateway for computers within the LAN to access the internet.
\layout Subsection

Software used
\layout Standard

The primary language used in the system is Python, but libraries in Python,
 C, and FORTRAN are used.
 The 2D point extraction makes heavy use of the Intel Integrated Performance
 Primatives (IPP) library.
 The linear algebra operations utilize ATLAS optimized versions of the LAPACK
 algorithms through the NumPy Python interface.
\layout Subsection

Algorithms in more detail
\layout Standard

Currently, the system extracts 2D and 3D coordinates from each frame 
\shape italic 
de novo
\shape default 
, maintaining no state information from prior frames.
 This affords the current system simplicity compared to history-dependent
 tracking algorithms, but also increases the computational load and probably
 results in worse tracking than would be possible if this information was
 stored and used.
\layout Standard

The 2D point extraction algorithm is inspired by a simple background subtraction
 technique but is enhanced by maintaining an ongoing estimate of per-pixel
 variance in addition to a slowly adapting mean image.
 Each image is scanned for a few points (currently 3) that differ most from
 the mean background image subject to a constraint that the distance to
 other detected points must be greater than some threshold.
 By tracking multiple 2D points in each image, the first step in tracking
 multiple objects simultaneously is already implemented.
\layout Standard

The 3D reconstruction algorithm utilizes a combinatorial 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

hypothesis testing
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 algorithm.
 Every possible combination of 2 or more cameras is chosen from all cameras
 returning 2D points on a given frame is tested.
 The winning combination is the one that uses most cameras while maintaining
 a low 3D->2D reprojection error from the original 2D tracked points is
 used.
 If a history-dependent algorithm were implemented, this would drastically
 cut down on the number of cominations that need to be tested.
 Furthermore, maintaining state information seems to be the easiest way
 to implement multiple-body tracking.
\layout Subsection

Why one computer per camera?
\layout Standard

Theoretically, a fast computer (particularly a multi-core computer) may
 be able to handle the computational load of processing images from more
 than one camera.
 The 1394a firewire bus is operating at near full bandwidth with a single
 camera, but additional firewire cards could be added to the system to create
 an additional firewire bus.
 Two firewire cards reach near the limit of the 32-bit PCI bus, and when
 two cameras were tried on two PCI firewire cards in a single system, frames
 were sometimes garbled.
 Its possible this was a software bug of some sort rather than a hardware
 issue, but given that additional computers are not particularly expensive,
 the easiest solution was to simply use one computer per camera.
\layout Subsection

Future improvements
\layout Standard

As mentioned above, the most obvious significant improvement to the system
 would be to maintain an ongoing estimate of state variables.
 Although this would increase the complexity of the program by requiring
 information from previous frames when operating on the current frame, it
 should dramatically reduce the computational load required for tracking
 in addition to enabling simultaneous multi-body tracking.
\layout Section

Parts list
\layout Subsection

General
\layout Itemize

mainbrain computer:
\begin_deeper 
\layout Itemize

the faster the better (e.g.
 dual core Athlon64)
\layout Itemize

ethernet: gigabit ethernet, PXE boot support
\layout Itemize

video: nVidia graphics (exact card doesn't matter)
\layout Itemize

large display, the more pixels the better
\layout Itemize

keyboard and mouse
\layout Itemize

at least 1 GB RAM
\end_deeper 
\layout Itemize

central fileserver/gateway computer (only modest computing needs):
\begin_deeper 
\layout Itemize

ethernet: gigabit ethernet and a 2nd ethernet channel (speed not important)
\layout Itemize

CD-ROM drive
\end_deeper 
\layout Itemize

rack or storage space for all computers
\layout Itemize

gigabit ethernet switch
\layout Itemize

external trigger for synchronizing cameras:
\begin_deeper 
\layout Itemize

AVR butterfly
\layout Itemize

power supply for AVR butterfly
\end_deeper 
\layout Itemize

Intel Integrated Performance Primitives (IPP) software license
\layout Itemize

MATLAB license (used for Multi-Camera Calibration algorithm)
\layout Subsection

Per camera
\layout Itemize

camera:
\begin_deeper 
\layout Itemize

currently using Basler A602f for large pixels and low noise (656x491x102
 fps), 1394a camera
\layout Itemize

Point Grey Dragonfly Express may be of interest for high speed (640x480x200
 fps), 1394b camera
\layout Itemize

there may be other cameras of interest, see http://damien.douxchamps.net/ieee1394/
cameras/index.php
\end_deeper 
\layout Itemize

compter:
\begin_deeper 
\layout Itemize

ethernet: gigabit ethernet, PXE boot support
\layout Itemize

firewire: 6-pin 1394a (or 1394b if using 1394b cameras)
\layout Itemize

at least 512 MB RAM
\end_deeper 
\layout Itemize

long firewire cable, e.g.
 SanMax 5m cable (firewire spec says max is 3m, but 5m cables seem to work)
\layout Itemize

cable for external trigger
\layout Itemize

camera mounting hardware, including tripod head
\layout Bibliography
\bibitem {hartley_zisserman}

Hartley, R.
 and Zisserman, A.
 (2003) 
\shape italic 
Multiple View Geometry in Computer Vision.

\shape default 
 Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press
\layout Bibliography
\bibitem {Svoboda}

Svoboda, T., Martinec, D., and Pajla, T.
 (2005) A convenient multicamera self-calibration for virtual environments.
 
\shape italic 
Presence-Teleoperators and Virtual Environments
\shape default 
 
\series bold 
14
\series default 
, 407-422.
\the_end
